Spec: Popover convergence (#17958)
microsoft/fluentui: packages/react-popup/Spec.md

In general the separation of both the position and alignment in v0 results in an API that is easier to use if a consumer only needs to modify one of the two props. However both try to achieve the same result in the end.

It's important to note that if an incorrect pair of `position` and `align` are provided in v0, then `position` takes priority and `align` is set to `center`

### Offset

```tsx
<ContextualMenu
  // single number value
  gap={100}
/>

<Popup
  offset={[-100, 100]}
/>

// offset can also be a function of raw Popper properties
const offsetFunction = ({
  popper: PopperJs.Rect;
  reference: PopperJs.Rect;
  placement: PopperJs.Placement;
}) => ([popper.width, -popper.height])
```

v8 positioning can only apply a numerical value to the first part position attribute of `DirectionalHint`. v0 supports a function to defer calculation at runtime. v0 also supports offset of the `Popup` in both axes while supporting RTL flips for offset values.

### Bounds and overflow

> ```typescript

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
```tsx
```

<Popup
...
  flipBoundary={htmlElement}
  overflowBoundary={htmlElement}
  mountNode={htmlElement}
/>
```

v0 `Popup` provides 3 different properties to handle bounds and overflow:

- flipBoundary - the bounds to calculate when to flip positioning of the popup
- overflowBoundary - the bounds to shift the popup without overflowing
- mountNode - where the popup is actually rendered in the DOM, by default this is a portal to a div in body

> ```typescript

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
```tsx
```

> <ContextualMenu

Reviewer: Should this be `Callout` instead of `ContextualMenu`?

Author: good point, I wrote up this stuff during the initial menu days

  // pixel values for bounding rectangle
  // defaults to target window as default bounding rectangle
  bounds={{height: 0, width: 0, top: 0, left:0 , right: 0, bottom: 0}}
  // callback for bounds
  bounds{(target, targetWindow) => ({/*Same object as above*/})}
  target={htmlElement}

  // renders to a portal node on body
  layerProps={/*ILayerProps*/}

  // every single one of the above can all be declared here too
  calloutProps={{bounds, target}}
/>
```

v8 `Callout` has no notion of separate boundaries for flip or overflow, and auto behaviour is used for flip and overflow 'pushing'.

### Events

v8 provides the following positioning event callbacks

- onLayerMounted -> proposed to be removed in converged Portal spec [#17824](https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/pull/17824)
- onPositioned

> - onScroll

Reviewer: Might be good to add a little description for these (`onLayerMounted` and `onScroll` might be more self-descriptive but I feel like `onPositioned` is more obscure).

### Hidden mount

v8 `Callout` provides two props which will allow mounting a hidden popup and disabling renders when the component is hidden. According to the PRs that introduced the features, it should be a performance optimization.

- `hidden` [#4419](https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/pull/4419)
- `shouldUpdateWhenHidden` [#10465](https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/pull/10465)

## Sample Code

```tsx
<Popover>
  <PopoverTrigger>
    <button>Opens popup</button>
  </PopoverTrigger>

  <PopoverContent>
    <h1>Popover</h2>
    <div>Some section</div>
    <div>Some section</div>
  </PopoverContent>
</Popover>
```

## Variants

- Anchor content to a different target than the trigger
- Inline popup rendered in DOM order
- Open on:
  - Click
  - Hover
  - Context menu (right click)
  - Focus

## API

The `Popover` component will use React context to manage both a trigger and content component.

### Popover

> Outer component that setups context and does not render DOM.

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
Outer component that sets up context and does not render DOM.
```

> TODO Discuss: v8 `onPositioned`

> TODO Discuss: v0/v8 `autoFocus/setInitialFocus` ? -> ***(not focus trap)** can be achieved pretty easily in userland with/without Tabster, in Teams this is extremely rare

> TODO Discuss: A11y -> Should only one popup be open at a time or is `aria-hidden` enough ?

> TODO Discuss: merge `position` and `align` props -> no real reason they were separated in v0 in the first place

> TODO Discuss: start small with API base for positioning props ?

The `@fluentui/react-positioning` library that exports the `usePopper` hook which will power the `Popover` contains more than the declared props here. These extra positioning props should be exposed as required.

```typescript
export interface PopoverProps {
  /**
   * Controls the popup open state
   */
  open?: boolean;

  /**
   * Call back when the component requests to change value
   */
  onOpenChange?: (e: OpenPopoverEvents, data: OpenEventData) => void;

  /**
   * Anchor the popup to an element other than the trigger
   */
  target?: HTMLElement;

>   /**
>    * Popover position relative to target
>    */
>   position?: string;
> 
>   /**
>    * Popover alignment relative to target
>    */
>   align?: string;

Reviewer: It might be good to constrain the type of `position` and `align` to a set of values and not only `string`. Also, should `align` be called `alignment`?

Here's a suggestion:

```suggestion
  /**
   * Popover render position relative to target
   */
  position?: 'after' | 'before' | 'bottom' | 'top';

  /**
   * Popover alignment to target based on its position
   */
  alignment?: 'start' | 'center' | 'end';
```

Author: v0 already uses `align` so it the familiar option, however we should discuss whether to merge the two tbh. Although I quite like that for RTL, only one needs to be flipped

Author: Added explicit values for the props

  /**
   * Popover offset value or callback with positioning props
   */
  offset?: OffsetFunction | [number, number];

  /**
   * Renders `PopoverContent` to a portal out of DOM order
   *

>    * @defaultValue document.body

Reviewer: Out of scope for this PR, but we should take a pass on the repo and decide on whether to use `default`, `defaultvalue` or `defaultValue`. It is a mixture of all three right now. Also maybe think of a lint rule to catch this in the future?

Author: yeah I will go for `@default` since it's supported in jsdoc too

   */
  mountNode?: string;
  
  /**
   * Explicitly render the popup in DOM order
   */
  inline?: boolean;
  
  /**
   * Traps focus inside the popup and applies modal dialog behaviour
   */
  trapFocus?: boolean;
}
```

### PopoverTrigger

This component does not render DOM. Utility component that clones a single child and applies HTML event callbacks to control the open/dismiss of the popup.

```typescript
export interface PopoverTriggerProps {
  /**
   * Should only be a single child
   */
  children?: React.ReactElement;
}
```

### PopoverContent

This component renders the positioned HTML element and renders user provided children. Renders as `<div>` by default.

```typescript

> export interface PopoverTriggerProps {
>   children?: React.ReactNode;
> }

Reviewer: Should this be the following?

```suggestion
export interface PopoverContentProps {
  children?: React.ReactNode[];
}
```

Author: yeah the name is a good catch but no need for array, `ReactNode` is essentially `anything`

Author: changed to `React.ReactElement`

## Background

> `Popups` contain content that is opened after interacting with visible content. The content does not belong to the flow of visible information and is rendered out of DOM order. The content can display complementary information to eixsting content, or serves as a lightweight Dialog with interactable content.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`Popups` contain content that is opened after interacting with visible content. The content does not belong to the flow of visible information and is rendered out of DOM order. The content can display complementary information to existing content, or serves as a lightweight Dialog with interactable content.
```

A `target` prop also exists so that the `Popup` does not have to be anchored to the `trigger` element.

### Position/Alignment hints

Both libraries provide an API that achieves the same end result for positioning and alignment. Below is a table that maps the v8 `DirectionalHint` with the v0 props of `position` and `alignment`

| DirectionalHint (v7) | position (v0) | align (v0) |
| -------------------- | ------------- | ---------- |
| topLeftEdge          | above         | start      |
| topCenter            | above         | center     |
| topRightEdge         | above         | bottom     |
| topAutoEdge          | above         |            |
| bottomLeftEdge       | above         | start      |
| bottomCenter         | below         | center     |
| bottomRightEdge      | below         | bottom     |
| bottomAutoEdge       | below         |            |
| leftTopEdge          | before        | top        |
| leftCenter           | before        | center     |
| leftBottomEdge       | before        | bottom     |
| rightTopEdge         | after         | before     |
| rightCenter          | after         | center     |
| rightBottomEdge      | after         | bottom     |

> v8 uses `left` and `right`. v0 uses `before` and `after`. v0 vocabulary tries to be consistent regardless of RTL state. It's also possible to supply an explicit RTL hint to v8 which is a flip by default. v0 will flip by default but requires the consumer to detect RTL scenarios and modify props in these situations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
v8 uses `left` and `right`. v0 uses `before` and `after`. v0 vocabulary tries to be consistent regardless of RTL state. It's also possible to supply an explicit RTL hint to v8 which is a flip by default. v0 will flip by default but requires the consumer to detect RTL scenarios and modify props in these situations.
```

In general the separation of both the position and alignment in v0 results in an API that is easier to use if a consumer only needs to modify one of the two props. However both try to achieve the same result in the end.

It's important to note that if an incorrect pair of `position` and `align` are provided in v0, then `position` takes priority and `align` is set to `center`

### Offset

> ```typescript

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```tsx
```

_nit_

<ContextualMenu
  // single number value
  gap={100}
/>

<Popup
  offset={[-100, 100]}
/>

// offset can also be a function of raw Popper properties
const offsetFunction = ({
  popper: PopperJs.Rect;
  reference: PopperJs.Rect;
  placement: PopperJs.Placement;
}) => ([popper.width, -popper.height])
```

> v8 positioning can only apply a numerical value to the first part position attribute of `DirectionalHint`. v0 supports a function to defer calculation at runtime. v0 Also supports offset of the `Popup` in both axes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
v8 positioning can only apply a numerical value to the first part position attribute of `DirectionalHint`. v0 supports a function to defer calculation at runtime. v0 also supports offset of the `Popup` in both axes.
```

> v8 positioning can only apply a numerical value to the first part position attribute of `DirectionalHint`. v0 supports a function to defer calculation at runtime. v0 Also supports offset of the `Popup` in both axes.

Reviewer 3: I think that it's important to mention that `offset` also handles RTL i.e values will be flipped when we are in RTL layout.

### Popup

Outer component that setups context and does not render DOM.

> TODO Discuss: dismiss on scroll ?

> TODO Discuss: v8 `hidden` `shouldUpdateHidden` prop [#4419](https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/pull/4419) [#10465](https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/pull/10465)

> TODO Discuss: v8 `onPositioned`

> TODO Discuss: v0/v8 `autoFocus/setInitialFocus` ?

> TODO Discuss: start small with API base for positioning props ?

The `@fluentui/react-positioning` library that exports the `usePopper` hook which will power the `Popup` contains more than the declared props here. These extra positioning props should be exposed as required.

```typescript
export interface PopupProps {
  /**
   * Explicitly render the popup in DOM order
   */
  inline?: boolean;

  /**
   * Controls the popup open state
   */
  open?: boolean;

  /**
   * Call back when the component requests to change value
   */
  onOpenChange?: (e: OpenPopupEvents, data: OpenEventData) => void;

  /**
   * Anchor the popup to an element other than the trigger
   */
  target?: HTMLElement;

  /**
   * Popup position relative to target
   */
  position?: string;

  /**
   * Popup alignment relative to target
   */

>   align?: string;

Reviewer 3: Can discuss also this? Usage of `align` & `position` is non-intuitive, in N* we had few offline discussions to merge them into a single prop.

  /**
   * Popup offset value or callback with positioning props
   */
  offset?: OffsetFunction | [number, number];

  /**
   * Renders `PopupContent` to a portal out of DOM order
   *
   * @defaultValue document.body
   */
  mountNode?: string;
}
```

### PopupTrigger

This component does not render DOM. Utility component that clones a single child and applies HTML event callbacks to control the open/dismiss of the popup.

```typescript
export interface PopupTriggerProps {
  /**
   * Should only be a single child
   */
  children?: React.ReactElement;
}
```

### PopupContent

> This componet renders the positioned HTML element and renders user provided children. Renders as `<div>` by default.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This component renders the positioned HTML element and renders user provided children. Renders as `<div>` by default.
```

_Describe what will need to be done to upgrade from the existing implementations:_

### v8

> - `onDismiss` should listen to `onOpenChange`
> - `preventDismissOnEvent` no longer exists, `onOpenChange` will return the associated event, so this functionality is still possible
> - Removed `onRestoreFocus`. `Popup` will focus the trigger when closed by default. Any other behaviour can be done through an effect by users
> - Removed `onPositioned`
> - Removed `doNotLayer` with `inline`
> - Removed all styling props supported by `Callout`. `makeStyles` should be used instead
> - Removed `coverTarget`, use `offset` callback instead
> - Removed `setInitialFocus`. If `trapFocus` is used, first focusable element is used. Users must handle other specific cases
> 
> ### v0
> 
> > TODO Discuss: v0 autoFocus -> only used in app-profile-card
> 
> - No more `autoFocus` for scenarios without `trapFocus`. Users should handle this scenario manually
> - No more `tabbableTrigger`. Users can do this with their own trigger element.
> - No `PopupContent` props, v0 duplicated props from `Popup` to `PopupContent`, all props should be declared on converged `Popup`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `onDismiss` should listen to `onOpenChange`.
- `preventDismissOnEvent` no longer exists, `onOpenChange` will return the associated event, so this functionality is still possible.
- Removed `onRestoreFocus`. `Popup` will focus the trigger when closed by default. Any other behaviour can be done through an effect by users.
- Removed `onPositioned`.
- Removed `doNotLayer` with `inline`.
- Removed all styling props supported by `Callout`. `makeStyles` should be used instead.
- Removed `coverTarget`, use `offset` callback instead.
- Removed `setInitialFocus`. If `trapFocus` is used, first focusable element is used. Users must handle other specific cases.

### v0

> TODO Discuss: v0 autoFocus -> only used in app-profile-card

- No more `autoFocus` for scenarios without `trapFocus`. Users should handle this scenario manually.
- No more `tabbableTrigger`. Users can do this with their own trigger element.
- No `PopupContent` props, v0 duplicated props from `Popup` to `PopupContent`, all props should be declared on converged `Popup`.
```

## Behaviors

### Trigger interactions

> A popup should support click, hover, context menu and focus interactions for the `PopupTrigger`. These interactions should also be composeable

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A popup should support click, hover, context menu and focus interactions for the `PopupTrigger`. These interactions should also be composable
```

#### Click

Clicking on the trigger when the popup is closed opens the popup.

Clicking the trigger when the popup is open closes the popup.

Click also includes `Spacebar` and `Enter` keys

#### Hover

When the mouse hovers over the trigger the popup opens.

> TODO Discuss: Menus don't have this behaviour, should this be consistent

> When the mouse leaves the trigger and popup content, the popup close.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the mouse leaves the trigger and popup content, the popup closes.
```

#### Context menu

Right click on the trigger opens the popup. The popup anchors to the mouse position.

> Shift + F10 on the trigger opens the popup

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Shift + F10 on the trigger opens the popup.
```

#### Focus

> TODO Discuss: This is a v0 behaviour not sure if it is still applicable

When the trigger is focused, the popup opens.

### Additional interactions

#### Escape key

The popup closes with the escape key when the trigger or popup content has focus.

#### Click outside

The popup closes when a click happens outside the popup trigger or content.

### Focus trap

When the popup is configured to be a focus trap, focus the first focusable element inside the popup on open.

### Nesting

> Popups should be nested

Reviewer 3: ![popup](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/14183168/117020034-56048080-acf6-11eb-89dc-a5a22d72ccda.gif)

(when user via keyboards opens an another popup, previous will be closed)

Can we also discuss this scenario?

Author: reflected this in the spec, and will discuss

## Accessibility

### Existing patterns

The [WAI Dialog pattern](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-practices-1.2/#dialog_modal) and its variants are the inspirations for `Popup` accessibility.

- [Datepicker](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-practices-1.2/examples/dialog-modal/datepicker-dialog.html)
- [Modal Dialog](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-practices-1.2/examples/dialog-modal/dialog.html)

### DOM element usage

Only the `PopupContent` component will render DOM markup. By default the components renders an HTML `div` element.

### Accessible markup

Accessible markup is divided into two scenarios:

```tsx
// Popup that does not trap focus
<button aria-haspopup="dialog">Trigger</button>
<div role="complementary">
  No focus trap
</div>

// Popup that does trap focus
<button aria-haspopup="dialog">Trigger</button>
<div role="dialog" aria-modal="true">
  Focus trapped
</div>

> ```

Reviewer 3: https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/blob/a48d8dfd969f944c44b8c902cc9d418c333d063d/packages/fluentui/react-northstar/src/components/Popup/Popup.tsx#L528-L531

As I remember, `trapFocus` and `inline` causes accessibility issues and N* even has a warning about it. I think that we should follow up on this and disable this scenario if it causes accessibility issues.

Author: Yeah, currently working on `Tabster` for a lower level solution to the problem, that could even enable `trapFocus` and `inline` together. I mentioned the a11y requirement of `aria-hidden` in the spec.

At least in N* it would be an issue because `aria-hidden` is set by the `FocuzTrapZone` which only applies to body direct children. In tabster, it's an open question whether to do the same, or actually support the inline focus trap by walking up the tree and setting `aria-hidden` on siblings

> _Describe what will need to be done to upgrade from the existing implementations:_

Reviewer: This line should probably be removed.

### v8

- `onDismiss` should listen to `onOpenChange`.
- `preventDismissOnEvent` no longer exists, `onOpenChange` will return the associated event, so this functionality is still possible.
- Removed `onRestoreFocus`. `Popup` will focus the trigger when closed by default. Any other behaviour can be done through an effect by users.
- Removed `onPositioned`.
- Removed `doNotLayer` with `inline`.
- Removed all styling props supported by `Callout`. `makeStyles` should be used instead.
- Removed `coverTarget`, use `offset` callback instead.
- Removed `setInitialFocus`. If `trapFocus` is used, first focusable element is used. Users must handle other specific cases.

### v0

> TODO Discuss: v0 autoFocus -> only used in app-profile-card

- No more `autoFocus` for scenarios without `trapFocus`. Users should handle this scenario manually.
- No more `tabbableTrigger`. Users can do this with their own trigger element.

> - No `PopoverContent` props, v0 duplicated props from `Popover` to `PopoverContent`, all props should be declared on converged `Popover`.

Reviewer: nit: Might be good to move this into a separate `MIGRATION.md` file to follow the pattern in other packages.

Author: yup will do that in a future PR

## Behaviors

### Trigger interactions

> A popup should support click, hover, context menu and focus interactions for the `PopoverTrigger`. These interactions should also be composable

Reviewer: nit:

```suggestion
A popup should support click, hover, context menu and focus interactions for the `PopoverTrigger`. These interactions should also be composable.
```

#### Click

> Clicking on the trigger when the popup is closed opens the popup.

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
Clicking the trigger when the popup is closed opens the popup.
```

Clicking the trigger when the popup is open closes the popup.

> Click also includes `Spacebar` and `Enter` keys

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click also includes `Spacebar` and `Enter` keys.
```

#### Hover

When the mouse hovers over the trigger the popup opens.

> TODO Discuss: Menus don't have this behaviour, should this be consistent

When the mouse leaves the trigger and popup content, the popup closes.

#### Context menu

Right click on the trigger opens the popup. The popup anchors to the mouse position.

Shift + F10 on the trigger opens the popup.

#### Focus

> TODO Discuss: This is a v0 behaviour not sure if it is still applicable

When the trigger is focused, the popup opens.

### Additional interactions

#### Escape key

The popup closes with the escape key when the trigger or popup content has focus.

#### Click outside

The popup closes when a click happens outside the popup trigger or content.

### Focus trap

When the popup is configured to be a focus trap, focus the first focusable element inside the popup on open.

### Nesting

> Popovers should be nested

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
Popovers should allow nesting.
```

## Accessibility

### Existing patterns

The [WAI Dialog pattern](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-practices-1.2/#dialog_modal) and its variants are the inspirations for `Popover` accessibility.

- [Datepicker](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-practices-1.2/examples/dialog-modal/datepicker-dialog.html)
- [Modal Dialog](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-practices-1.2/examples/dialog-modal/dialog.html)

### DOM element usage

Only the `PopoverContent` component will render DOM markup. By default the components renders an HTML `div` element.

### aria-hidden

Using a `Popover` with a focus trap is no different from a modal dialog in terms of a11y. Therefore, `aria-hidden` must be applied to all non-interactive elements of the page when the `Popover` is open.

> This also means that `Popover` should be closed when another `Popover` is opened when there is no nesting. In a nested case, the parent `Popovers` need to be hidden.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This also means that a `Popover` should be closed when another `Popover` is opened if they are not nested. In a nested case, the parent `Popovers` need to be hidden.
```
